GWEN IFILL: Now: the power of
altruism, not
just for those on the receiving
end, but also
how it provides physical and
emotional benefits
for the giver.
Economics correspondent Paul
Solman takes
a look, part of our weekly
segment Making
Sense, which airs every Thursday
on the "NewsHour."
WOMAN: I want you to meet my
friend Monkey.
Hello. Do you want to say hello?
PAUL SOLMAN: It is better to
give than to
receive. You may have heard it
when you were
about this age, or even in the
past few weeks,
when you bought out the entire
Christmas list.
WOMAN: Look, Monkey has a bowl
just like you.
You don't have any treats and
neither does
Monkey.
PAUL SOLMAN: But better for
whom? A behavioral
economics experiment has come up
with a provocative
answer.
WOMAN: I'm going to give them
all to you.
PAUL SOLMAN: Psychology
professor Elizabeth
Dunn designed this test to see
if even very
young kids could be happier
giving than receiving.
ELIZABETH DUNN, University of
British Columbia:
We worked with kind of the
toddler equivalent
of gold, namely goldfish
crackers. We gave
them a bunch goldfish for
themselves, and
then we gave them the chance to
give some
of these goldfish away to a
puppet named Monkey.
WOMAN: Will you give one to
Monkey? Yes?
CHILD: Yes.
PAUL SOLMAN: Dunn recorded
dozens of kids
doing this, then had students
who knew nothing
about the experiment compare the
facial expressions
when receiving and when giving.
When were
the kids happiest?
ELIZABETH DUNN: What we see is
that the toddlers
are happier when they're getting
the chance
to give the goldfish away, as
compared to
when they're getting the
goldfish for themselves.
PAUL SOLMAN: Much happier. So,
it's no surprise
that, with fellow happiness
scholar Michael
Norton, Dunn has written a book:
"Happy Money:
The Science of Happier
Spending."
It features five key takeaways.
ELIZABETH DUNN: Well, if you
want to use money
to buy happiness, we suggest you
should buy
experiences, you should buy
time, you should
make it a treat, you should pay
now and consume
later, and you should invest in
others.
PAUL SOLMAN: Invest in others,
the most surprising
finding of the five and one
which regularly
elicits skepticism, says
business school professor
Michael Norton.
MICHAEL NORTON, Harvard
University: A lot
of people, when we talk about
the fact that
giving makes you happy and
you're better off
giving than spending your money
on yourself,
will argue back, first off, that
we're crazy,
and, secondly, that that can't
be true, because
I don't really know what you
like, but I definitely
know what I like. And so, just
by definition,
I'm better at spending my money
on myself
and getting happiness than you,
because I
don't know everything about you.
WOMAN: Can panda have one? Yes.
Can one go
in his bowl?
MICHAEL NORTON: It's just not
what we see
in this study. So, even with
these toddlers,
who are 2 years old, even if
it's the case
that their parents are making
them give in
order to be a nice person,
they're smiling.
And smiling is something that
just comes out.
It's not something that you can
control very
well.
PAUL SOLMAN: And it's not just
toddlers. Dunn
also designed an experiment for
grownups.
ELIZABETH DUNN: We went out on
our campus
at the University of British
Columbia and
just walked up to people in the
morning and
handed them either a $5 or a $5
bill, which
we asked them to spend by the
end of the day.
And there was a catch. We told
some people
they had to spend the money on
themselves.
We told some people they had to
spend the
money on somebody else.
And what we found was that
people who'd been
randomly assigned to spend this
money on somebody
else felt better by the end of
the day than
people who'd been assigned to
spend that same
small amount of money on
themselves.
PAUL SOLMAN: A small experiment,
small money,
small number of subjects. And
Canadians are
unusually nice, eh?
ELIZABETH DUNN: So, we conducted
parallel
experiments in Canada, Uganda,
South Africa,
as well as collecting
correlational data from
around the world. And what we
saw was that
in poor and rich countries
alike, people felt
happier when they had the chance
to spend
money on others rather than
themselves.
PAUL SOLMAN: Best of all,
though, is the chance
to spend it on others you can
actually see.
MICHAEL NORTON: So, a lot of the
charitable
giving that a lot of us do, we
write a check
and it goes somewhere. And we
can show that
that does make you happier, but
think of the
difference between the check
goes into the
ether and you don't know what
happened with
the money, compared to you
really tangibly
see the impact that your money
had on another
person.
PAUL SOLMAN: Or even just the
imaginary effect
on a stuffie.
WOMAN: Can you give one to
giraffe?
PAUL SOLMAN: But are all kids
equally altruistic?
Is there a normal distribution,
a kind of
bell curve, some give a lot and
are really
happy, some are not happy at
all, most in
the middle?
ELIZABETH DUNN: It's actually
surprisingly
consistent. So, most of the
toddlers are happier
when they're giving than when
they're getting
the treats for themselves.
PAUL SOLMAN: So what's that red
spot on the
brain?
ABIGAIL MARSH, Georgetown
University: So,
the red mark in the brain is an
area of functional
activation in the region called
the amygdala.
PAUL SOLMAN: Georgetown
University psychology
Professor Abigail Marsh measures
the brain
activity of what she terms
extraordinary altruists,
people who donated a kidney to a
total stranger.
ABIGAIL MARSH: The amygdala is
part of what's
called the mammalian brain. It's
involved
with emotions like fear and it's
in social processes, like, to
some extent,
love and caring. This is an
image from a brain
scan that we did looking at
differences in
amygdala activation in people
who had donated
a kidney to a stranger relative
to people
who have not.
PAUL SOLMAN: Her research, she
says, was unequivocal:
The altruistic amygdalas were
about 8 percent
larger than normal.
ABIGAIL MARSH: Altruistic kidney
donors showed
increased activation in the
amygdala when
they saw somebody in distress,
which is the
opposite of people at the other
end of the
compassion spectrum,
psychopaths, who show
reduced activation in the
amygdala when they
see somebody in distress.
PAUL SOLMAN: And in one study of
psychopaths'
brains:
ABIGAIL MARSH: Their amygdalas
were shown
to be 17 to 18 percent smaller
than that of
controls, so this also seems to
be related
to having lower levels of
concern or compassion
for other people.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, Dr. Seuss was
right. The
Grinch's heart is really three
sizes too small?
ABIGAIL MARSH: Yes, I do use
that analogy
sometimes. In fact, maybe it was
his amygdala
that was too small.
PAUL SOLMAN: So when people find
that giving
is more gratifying than
receiving, what's
going on?
ABIGAIL MARSH: Everything I
think we have
learned from our research is
consistent with
the idea that it is a good thing
and beneficial
for a person to be giving and
generous to
other people.
WOMAN: Do you want to give the
last treat
to you or to Monkey?
PAUL SOLMAN: One last
experiment: the effect
of giving on blood pressure.
Professor Dunn
gave adults over 65 with high
blood pressure
pill bottles filled with money.
ELIZABETH DUNN: We asked them to
take home
these pill bottles and open them
on specified
days over the course of three
weeks. Now,
inside each bottle was actually
$20. And if
you look at the label, there are
some instructions
about what you should be doing
with that money.
PAUL SOLMAN: Please spend this
money on someone
else by 4:30 p.m. at the date
listed below.
ELIZABETH DUNN: Other people got
pill bottles
that looked very similar, except
the instruction
is a little bit different.
PAUL SOLMAN: Please spend this
money on yourself.
ELIZABETH DUNN: So, everybody
was pretty happy
getting pill bottles filled with
money. But
when we measured their blood
pressure, both
before and after the study, what
we found
was that people who got these
pill bottles
telling them to spend the money
on somebody
else showed a significant
reduction in their
blood pressure from the
beginning to the end
of the study.
In contrast, people who got this
pill bottle
who were told to spend the money
on themselves
just showed no change from the
beginning to
the end.
PAUL SOLMAN: Now, Dunn insists
we issue this
warning. No matter how generous
the hypertense
among you become after watching
this story,
please do not give up your blood
pressure
medication just yet.
But if you want a quick ticket
to happiness,
it seems, whether your stash is
in gold or
goldfish, give it away. You will
be happy
you did.
From Washington, D.C., and
Boston, this is
economics correspondent Paul
Solman, happily
sharing this news with you, the
"PBS NewsHour"
audience.